MARIE: An
Introduction
to a Simple Computer

CPU Basics
• The computer’s CPU fetches, decodes, and executes
program instructions.
• The two principal parts of the CPU are the
datapath and the control unit.– The datapath consists of an arithmetic
(registers)
that are‐logic unit and storage
interconnected by a data bus that is also 
connected to main memory.– Various CPU components perform sequenced
according to signals provided by its
operations 
control unit.
units
CPU Basics
• Registers
the CPU.
hold data that can be readily
• They can be implemented using D flip‐flops.– A32‐bit register requires 32 D flip‐flops.
• The arithmetic‐logic unit (ALU) carries out
arithmetic operations as directed
accessed by
logical and
by the control unit.
• The control unit determines which actions to
according to the values in a program
status
register.
carry out
counter register and a
The Input/Output Subsystem
• Acomputer communicates with the outside world
its input/output (I/O) subsystem.
• I/O devices connect to the CPU through various
through
interfaces.
• I/O can be memory‐mapped—where the I/O device
like main memory from the CPU’s point of view.
behaves
• Or I/O can be instruction‐based, where the CPU has a specialized
I/O instruction set.
Memory Organization
Memory Organization
MARIE Arch.
• The MARIE architecture has the following 
characteristics:– Binary, two's complement data representation.– Stored program, fixed word length data and 
instructions.– 4K words of word‐addressable main memory.– 16‐bit data words.– 16‐bit instructions, 4 for the opcode and 12 for the 
address.– A 16‐bit arithmetic logic unit (ALU).
0
4K-1
8– Seven registers for control and data movement.
MARIE Arch.
MARIE’s seven registers are:
• (1) Accumulator, AC, a 16‐bit register that holds 
a conditional operator (e.g., "less than") or one 
operand of a two‐operand instruction.
• (2) Memory address register, MAR, a 12‐bit
register that holds the memory address of an 
instruction or the operand of an instruction.
• (3) Memory buffer register, MBR, a 16‐bit
register that holds the data after its retrieval 
from, or before its placement in memory.
9
MARIE Arch.
MARIE’s seven registers are:
• (4) Program counter, PC, a 12‐bit register that 
holds the address of the next program 
instruction to be executed.
• (5) Instruction register, IR, which holds an 
instruction immediately preceding its execution.
• (6) Input register, InREG, an 8‐bit register that 
holds data read from an input device.
• (7) Output register, OutREG, an 8‐bit register, 
that holds data that is ready for the output 
device.
10
Instruction Set Arch.
• This is the format of a MARIE instruction:
• Each instruction for MARIE consists of 16 bits. 
• The most significant 4 bits, bits 12–15, make up the opcode that specifies the instruction to 
be executed 
• The least significant 12 bits, bits 0–11, form an address, which allows for a maximum 
memory size of 212–1 
11
Register Transfer Notation
• The RTL for the LOAD instruction is:
MAR  X
MBR  M[MAR]
AC  MBR
• These two operations are on separate lines to indicate that they cannot occur during the 
same cycle
• Because off a special connection between the MBR and the AC, the transfer of the data from 
the MBR to the AC can occur immediately after the data is put into the MBR, without 
waiting for the bus. 
• Similarly, “Store X” instruction stores the contents of the AC in memory location X:
MAR ← X, MBR ← AC
M[MAR] ← MBR
12
Register Transfer Notation
• Similarly, the RTL for the ADD instruction is:
MAR  X
MBR  M[MAR] 
AC  AC + MBR
• Subt X
Similar to Add, this instruction subtracts the value stored at address X from the accumulator and places the 
result back in the AC:
MAR  X
MBR  M[MAR] 
AC  AC - MBR 
13
Instruction Processing
• Thefetch‐decode‐execute cycle is the series of steps that a
computer carries out when it runs a program.
• Wefirst have to fetch an instruction from memory, and place
it into the IR.
• Onceinthe IR, it is decoded to determine what needs to be
done next.
• If amemory value (operand) is involved in the operation, it is
retrieved and placed into the MBR.
• Witheverything in place, the instruction is executed.
14
Instruction Processing, detailed steps
• Fetching phase:
• Copy the contents of the PC to the MAR: 
MAR  PC.
• Go to main memory and fetch the instruction found at the address in the MAR, placing 
this instruction in the IR; increment PC by 1: 
IR  M[MAR] and then PC  PC+1 
• Because MARIE is word-addressable, the PC is incremented by one, which results in the 
next word’s address occupying the PC.
• If MARIE were byte-addressable, the PC would need to be incremented by 2 to point to 
the address of the next instruction.
15
Instruction Processing, detailed steps
• Decoding phase:
• Copy the rightmost 12 bits of the IR into the MAR; decode the leftmost four bits to 
determine the opcode,
MAR  IR[11–0], and decode IR[15–12].   
• Execution phase:
• Use the address in the MAR to go to memory to get data, placing the data in the MBR 
(and possibly the AC), and then execute the instruction.
MBR  M[MAR] and execute the actual instruction 
16
Extending Instruction Set
• So far, all of the MARIE instructions that we have discussed
use a direct addressing mode.
• This means that the address of the operand is explicitly stated
in the instruction.
• It is often useful to employ an indirect addressing, where the
address of the address of the operand is given in the
instruction.
Extending Instruction Set 
instruction set.
• We have included three indirect addressing mode instructions in the MARIE
• The first two are LOADI X and STOREI X where specifies the address
of the operand to be loaded or stored.
• The ADDI instruction is a combination of  LOADI X and ADDX:
• In RTL :
LOADI X
STOREI X
ADDI X
A Discussion on Decoding
• A computer’s control unit keeps things synchronized, making sure that bits 
flow to the correct components as the components are needed.
• There are two general ways in which a control unit can be implemented: 
hardwired control and 
microprogrammed control.
• With microprogrammed control, a small program is placed into read‐only 
memory in the microcontroller.
• Hardwired controllers implement this program using digital logic 
components.
Instruction Formats
• Byte ordering, or endianness, is another major architectural
consideration.
• If we have a two-byte integer, the integer may be stored so
that the least significant byte is followed by the most
significant byte or vice
versa.– In little endian machines, the least significant byte is followed by
the most significant byte.– Big endian machines store the most significant byte first (at the
lower address).
As an example, suppose we have thehexadecimal number 0x12345678.
L
M
Instruction Formats
• The principal advantage of postfix notation is that
parentheses are not used.
• For example, the infix expression,
Z = (X  Y) + (W  U)
becomes:
Z = X Y  W U  +
in postfix notation.
Instruction Formats
• Example: Convert the infix expression (2+3)– 6/3 to postfix:
Instruction Formats
• Example: Use a stack to evaluate the postfix expression 2 3 + 6 3 /- :
1
2
5
3
4
Instruction Formats
• Let's see how to evaluate an infix expression using
different instruction formats.
• With a
three-address ISA, (e.g., mainframes), the
infix expression,
Z = X  Y + W  U
might look like this:
MULT R1,X,Y 
MULT R2,W,U 
ADD Z,R1,R2
Instruction Formats
• In a
two-address ISA, (e.g., Intel, Motorola), the infix
expression,
Z = X  Y + W  U
• might look like this:
LOAD R1,X 
MULT R1,Y 
LOAD R2,W 
MULT R2,U 
ADD R1,R2 
STORE Z,R1
Instruction Formats
• In a
one-address ISA, like MARIE, the infix
expression,
Z = X  Y + W  U
• lookslike this:
LOAD X 
MULT Y
STORE TEMP 
LOAD W 
MULT U
ADD TEMP 
STORE Z
Instruction Formats
• In a stack ISA, the postfix expression,
Z = X Y  W U  +
• might look like
this:
PUSH X 
PUSH Y 
MULT 
PUSH W 
PUSH U 
MULT 
ADD
POP Z
Instruction Formats
• Asystem has 16
registers and 4K of
memory.
• Weneed 4 bits to
access one of the
registers. We
need 12 bits for a
memory address.
also
• If the system is to have
16-bit instructions, we
have two choices for our
Three More Possibilities for a 16-Bit Instruction Format
instructions:
Instruction Formats
• If we allow the length of
the opcode to
vary,
we could create a very
rich instruction 
set:– 15 instructions with three addresses– 14 instructions with two addresses– 31 instructions with one address– 16 instructions with zero addresses
5.2 Instruction Formats
• Example: Given 8-bit instructions, is it possible to allow the following to be
encoded?– 3instructions with two 3-bit operands– 2instructions with one 4-bit operand– 4instructions with one 3-bit operand
• Weneed:– 3 23  23 =192bits for the 3-bit operands– 224=32bits forthe 4-bit operands– 423=32bits forthe 3-bit operands
• Total: 256 bits.
• With a total of 256 bits required, we can exactly encode our 
instruction set in 8 bits!
Addressing
• Immediate addressing is where the data is part of the
instruction.
• Direct addressing is where the address of the data is given in
the instruction.
• Register addressing is where the data is located in a register.
• Indirect addressing gives the address of the address of the
data in the instruction.
• Register indirect addressing uses a register to store the
address of the address of the data.
Addressing
• Indexed addressing uses a register (implicitly or explicitly)
as an
offset, which is added to the
operand
address in the
to determine the effective address of the data.
• Based addressing is similar except that a base 
register is used instead of an index register.
• The difference between these two is that an index register
holds an offset relative to the address given in the instruction,
a base register holds a base address where the address field
represents a displacement from this base.
Addressing 
• For the instruction shown, what value is loaded
into the accumulator for each addressing mode?
Instruction Pipelining
• Some CPUs divide the fetch-decode- execute cycle into 
smaller steps.
• These smaller steps can often be executed in parallel to 
increase throughput.
• Such parallel execution is called 
instruction pipelining.
• Instruction pipelining provides for instruction level 
parallelism (ILP)
Instruction Pipelining
• For every clock cycle, one small step is carried out, and the 
stages are overlapped.
S1. Fetch instruction.
S2. Decode opcode.
S3. Calculate effective
address of operands.
S4. Fetch operands.
S5. Execute.
S6. Store result.
Instruction Pipelining
• Thetheoretical speedup offered by a pipeline can be 
determined as follows:– Lettpbethetimeperstage.Each instruction representsa task,
T, in the pipeline.– Thefirst task (instruction) requires k  tp time to completein a k-stage
pipeline. The remaining (n– 1) tasks emergefrom thepipeline oneper
cycle. So the total time to complete theremainingtasks is (n– 1)tp.– Thus,to completen tasks using a k-stage pipeline requires:
(k  tp) + (n–1)tp = (k+ n–1)tp.
Instruction Pipelining
• If we take the time
required to complete n tasks without a pipeline
and divide it by the time
it takes to complete n tasks using a
pipeline
, we find:
• If we take the limit as n approaches infinity, (k + n– 1)
approaches n, which results in a theoretical speedup of:
Types of Memory
• There are two
kinds of main memory: random access memory
(RAM) and read-only-memory (ROM).
• There
are two types of RAM: dynamic RAM (DRAM) andstatic
RAM(SRAM).
• DRAMconsists of capacitors
that slowly leak their charge over time.
Thus, they must be refreshed every few milliseconds to prevent data
loss.
• DRAMis“cheap” memory owing to its simple design.
• SRAM consists of circuits similar to the 
D flip-flop .
• SRAM is very fast memory and it doesn’t need to be refreshed like 
DRAM does. It is used to build cache memory
.
Types of Memory
• SRAM is faster and much more expensive than DRAM; however,
designers
use DRAM because it is much denser (can store many
bits
per chip), uses less power, and generates less heat than
SRAM
.
• ROMalsodoesnot need to berefreshed, either. In
fact, it
needs very little charge to retain its memory.
• ROMisused to store permanent
, or semi-permanent data that
persists even while the system is turned off.
The Memory Hierarchy
• This leads us to some definitions.– Ahit is when data is found at a given memory level.– Amiss is when it is not found.– The hit rate is the percentage of time data is found at a given
memory level.– The miss rate is the percentage of time it is not.– Miss rate = 1– hit rate.– The hit time is the time
level.– The miss penalty is the time
required to access data at a given memory
required to process a miss, including
the time that it takes to replace a block of memory plus the time it
takes to deliver the data to the processor.
6.4 The Cache Memory 
• The simplest cache mapping scheme is direct mapped
cache.
• In a direct mapped cache consisting of N blocks of cache,
block X of main memory maps to cache block
Y= X mod N.
• Thus, if we have 10 blocks of cache, block 7 of cache may
hold blocks 7, 17, 27, 37, . . . of main memory.
• With direct mapped cache consisting of 4 blocks of 
cache, block X of main memory maps to cache block Y = 
X mod 4.
6.4 The Cache Memory 
• To perform direct mapping, the binary main memory address is
partitioned into the fields shown below.– The offset field uniquely identifies an address within a specific block.– The block field selects a unique block of cache.– The tag field is whatever is left over.
The Format of a Main Memory Address Using Direct Mapping– The sizes of these fields are determined by characteristics of both memory
and cache.
The Cache Memory 
• Suppose instead of placing memory blocks in specific cache 
locations based on memory address, we could allow a block to
go anywhere in
cache.
• In this way, cache would have to fill up before any blocks are
evicted.
• This is how fully
associative cache works.
• Amemory address is partitioned into only two fields: the tag
and the offset.
6.4 The Cache Memory 
• Set associative cache combines the ideas of
direct mapped cache and fully associative
cache.
• An N-way set associative cache mapping is like
direct
mapped cache in that a memory
reference maps to a particular location in cache.
• Unlike direct mapped cache, a memory
reference maps to a set of several cache
blocks, similar to the way in which fully 
associative cache works.
• Instead of mapping
anywhere in the entire
cache, a memoryreference can map only to
the subset of cache
slots.
The Cache Memory 
• Example : Suppose a byte-addressable memory contains 1MB and
cache consists of 32 blocks, where each block contains 16 bytes.
Using direct mapping, fully associative mapping, and a 4-way set
associative mapping, determine where the main memory address
0x326A0 maps to in cache.– First note that a main memory address has 20 bits. The main memory
address for direct mapped cache is shown.– If we represent our main memory address 0x326A0 in binary and place the 
bits into the format, we get:– So this address maps to cache block 01010 (or block 10).
The Cache Memory 
• Example :.– If we are using fully associative cache, we 
have:– Butbecause it is fully associative, it could map
anywhere.– If we are using 4-way set associative cache, we have:– If we divide the main memory address into these fields, 
we get:
The Cache Memory 
• With fully associative and set associative cache, a replacement policy is
invoked when it becomes necessary to evict a block from cache.
• An optimal
replacement policy would be able to look
into the future to
see which
blocks won’t be needed for the longest period of time.
• Although it is impossible to implement an optimal replacement algorithm, it 
is instructive to use it as a benchmark for assessing the efficiency of any
other scheme we come up with.
• The replacement policy - A least recently used (LRU) algorithm keeps 
track of 
the last time that a block was assessed and evicts the 
block that has been unused for the longest period of time.
• The disadvantage of this approach is its complexity: LRU has to maintain an 
access history for each block, which ultimately slows down the cache.
The Cache Memory 
•
First-in, first-out (FIFO) is a popular cache replacement
policy.
• InFIFO, the block that has been in the cache the longest,
regardless of when it was last used.
• A
random replacement policy does what its name implies: It picks
a block at random and replaces it with a new block.
• Randomreplacement cancertainly evict a block that will be needed
often or needed soon, but it never thrashes.
The Cache Memory 
• The performance of hierarchical memory is measured by its effective
access time (EAT).
• EAT is a weighted average that takes into account the hit ratio and
relative access times of successive level of memory.
• TheEATfor atwo-level memory is given by:
EAT =H  AccessC + (1–H)  AccessMM
where H is the cache hit rate and AccessC and AccessMM are the
access times for cache and main memory, respectively.
The Cache Memory 
• For example, consider a system with a main memory access time
rate of99%.
of 200ns supported by a cache having a 10ns access time and a 
hit
• Suppose access to cache and main memory occurs
concurrently (the accesses overlap).
• The EATis:
EAT = H  AccessC + (1 – H)  AccessMM
0.99(10ns) + 0.01(200ns) = 9.9ns + 2ns = 11ns
Virtual Memory
• A physical address is the actual memory address of physical 
memory.
• Programs create virtual addresses that are mapped to physical 
addresses by the memory manager.
• Page faults occur when a logical address requires that a page 
be brought in from disk
.
• Memory fragmentation occurs when the paging process 
results in the creation of small, unusable clusters of memory 
addresses.

Virtual Memory
• Information concerning the location of each page, whether 
on disk or in memory, is maintained in a data structure 
called a page table (shown below).
• There is one page table for each active process.
• When a process generates a virtual 
address, the operating system 
translates it into a physical memory 
address.
• To accomplish this, the virtual address is 
divided into two fields: A page field, 
and an offset field.
• The page field determines the page location 
of the address, and the offset indicates the 
location of the address within the page.
• The logical page number is translated 
into a physical page frame through a 
lookup in the page table.
Virtual Memory
0
0
1
2
000010111011110
6-bit page # 10-bit offset
Process
page table
16-bit logical address
0001100111011110
16-bit physical address
(a) Paging
000101
000110
011001
0001001011110000
4-bit segment # 12-bit offset
Process segment table
Length Base
16-bit logical address
001011101110 0
1
0000010000000000
0111100111100010000000100000 +
Virtual Memory
• If the valid bit is zero in the page table entry
for the logical address, this means that the
page is not in memory and must be
fetched from disk.– This is a page fault.– If necessary, a page is evicted from memory
and is replaced by the page retrieved from
disk, and the valid bit is set to 1.
• If the valid bit is 1, the virtual page
number is replaced by the physical
frame number.
• Thedata is then accessed by adding the
offset to the physical frame number.
Virtual Memory
Effective Access Time Using Paging
• Effective access time (EAT) takes all levels of memory into
consideration.
• Thus, virtual memory is also a factor in the calculation, and we
also have to consider page table access time.
• Suppose a main memory access takes 200ns, the page fault
rate is 1%, and it takes 10ms to load a page from disk. We have:– EAT=0.99(200ns + 200ns)+ 0.01(10ms) = 100, 396ns
Virtual Memory
• Bothpagingandsegmentation can cause fragmentation
.
• Pagingis subject to internal fragmentation because a  process may not
need the entire range of addresses contained within the page. Thus,
there may be many pages containing unused fragments of memory.
• Segmentationissubjectto external fragmentation, whichoccurs when
contiguous chunks of memory become broken up as segments are
allocated and deallocated over time.