Exam Date: 6/1/2026

Question 1: determine the true/false statements and illustrate your answer with reason
Functional requirements that focuses on what the system should do and should not do.

Component diagram depicts a static view of the run-time configuration of hardware nodes and the software components that run on those nodes.

The formal project monitoring mechanisms rely on the ability of project manager to make daily discussions with project staff.

The project delivers is part of project plan which represent the beginning and end date of the task or project.

Failing to meet a non-functional requirement can mean that the whole system is unusable

The standard requirement is classified as non-functional and organizational requirement.

Domain requirements that come from the application domain of the system and that reflect characteristics and constraints, and they are represented as non functional requirements.

Use Case diagram represents the interaction of the user with the software but tells nothing about the internal working of the software.

The object diagram is more specific compared to class diagram, where it shows instances instead of classes.

When comparing the Communication Diagram and the Activity Diagram, we'll see the first is more focused on showing the collaboration of objects rather than the time sequence.

Question 2: MCQ
Which model can be selected if unexperienced user is involved in all the phases of SDLC?

a) Waterfall Model

b) Prototyping Model

c) iterative Model

d) both Prototyping Model & iterative Model

Which of the following considers as milestones:

a. The project plan approval.

b. The requirement definition

c. The design identification

d. A and C

The project scheduling processes are iterative process that may be repeated from the

a. Identifying activity stage

b. Estimate process stage

c. Identifying activity dependencies stage

d. All of the mentioned

===== Page 2 =====

Proposal Writing is one of the management activities which concerns on

a. keep track of the progress of the project
b. identifying the activities, milestones and deliverables produced by a project
c. describes the objectives of the project, cost and schedule estimates
d. Motivating project personnel

The system allow the registered user to check the history", which kind of requirements this sentence represents

a. non functional
b. system
c. functional
d. non of mentioned

Question 3: Answer THREE of the following question, illustrate your answer with example
Discuss the different risk planning strategies, illustrate your answer with example

list the project scheduling processes, Then Discuss them in detail.

Discuss the Objectives of Software Engineering.

Question 4: Analyse the following and develop the use cases and sequence diagrams
Let's imagine we will develop a browser-based training system to help people prepare for such a certification exam. A user can request a quiz for the system. The system picks a set of questions from its database, and compose them together to make a quiz. It rates the user's answers, and gives hints if the user requests it.

In addition to users, we also have tutors who provide questions and hints. And also examinations who must certify questions to make sure they are not too trivial.

Make a use case diagram to model this system. Work out some of your use cases. Since we don't have real stake holders here, you are free to fill in details.

Develop the use case diagram.

Develop sequence diagram.

Question 5: Determine the type of risks for the following cases, consider the overlapped cases
New Technologies used in the product; for example a new DB server, a new programming language.

Delays in the delivery of the automated tools for testing, and Lack of testing environments.

New government regulations or policies.

The communication between the client and team is insufficient.

Improper resource allocation are associated with software development process.

Best Wishes