Cybersecurity Fundamentals
CCY2001: Introduction to Cybersecurity
Dr. Ehab Abousaif
PhD in Electrical and Computer Eng., University of Idaho, USA
IEEE member, IMAPS member
College of Computing and Information Technology, AASTMT
Cell:       
01114757888
Email:    ehabkamel@gmail.com
Topic 4
Cryptography 
Part 4
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 1
Topic 4
Cryptography 
Part 4
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 2
Cryptographic Hash Function
A hash function H accepts a 
variable-length block of data 
M as input and produces a 
fixed-size hash value (Code) 
h = H(M)
Cryptographic hash function is an algorithm for 
which it is computationally infeasible to find 
either: 
a) Data object that maps to a pre-specified hash 
result (the one-way property) 
b) Two data objects that map to the same hash 
result (the collision-free property)
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 3
Message Authentication
Message Authentication is a mechanism or service used to verify 
the integrity of a message.
Message authentication assures that data received are exactly as 
sent (i.e., there is no modification, insertion, deletion, or replay). 
When a hash function is used to provide message authentication, 
the hash function value is often referred to as a Message Digest.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 4
Message Authentication
The essence of the use of a hash function for message 
integrity is as follows:
1. The sender computes a hash value as a function of the bits in 
the message and transmits both the hash value and the message.
2. The receiver performs the same hash calculation on the 
message and compares this value with the incoming hash value.
3. If there is a mismatch, the receiver knows that the message (or 
possibly the hash value) has been altered.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 5
Message 
Authentication
Attack
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 6
Message 
Authentication Code
Also known as a keyed hash function.
Typically used between two parties that share a secret key to 
authenticate information exchanged between those parties.
Takes as input a secret key and a data block and produces a hash value (MAC) 
which is associated with the protected message
• If the integrity of the message needs to be checked, the MAC function can be 
applied to the message and the result compared with the associated MAC value
• An attacker who alters the message will be unable to alter the associated MAC 
value without knowledge of the secret key
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 7
Message Authentication 
Examples
(a) The message plus concatenated hash
code is encrypted using symmetric
encryption. Because only A and B share
the secret key, the message must have
come from Aand has not been altered. The
hash code provides the structure or
redundancy
required
to
achieve
authentication. Because encryption is
applied to the entire message plus hash
code, confidentiality is also provided.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 8
Message Authentication 
Examples
(b) Only the hash code is encrypted,
using symmetric encryption. This reduces
the
processing burden for those
applications
that
confidentiality.
do not require
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 9
Message Authentication 
Examples
(c) The technique assumes that the two
communicating parties share a common
secret value S. A computes the hash
value over the concatenation of M and S
and appends the resulting hash value to
M. Because B possesses S, it can
recompute the hash value to verify.
Because the secret value itself is not
sent, an opponent cannot modify an
intercepted
message and cannot
generate a false message.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 10
Message Authentication 
Examples
(d) Confidentiality can be added to the
approach of method (c) by encrypting
the entire message plus the hash code.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 11
Digital Signature
Operation is similar to that of the MAC
The hash value of a message is encrypted with a user’s private key
Anyone who knows the user’s public key can verify the integrity of 
the message
An attacker who wishes to alter the message would need to know 
the user’s private key
Implications of digital signatures go beyond just message 
authentication
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 12
Digital Signature 
Examples
(a) The hash code is encrypted, using public-key encryption with the sender’s
Private key. This provides authentication. It also provides a digital signature,
because only the sender could have produced the encrypted hash code. In fact,
this is the essence of the digital signature technique.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 13
Digital Signature 
Examples
(b) If confidentiality as well as a digital signature is desired, then the message
plus the private-key-encrypted hash code can be encrypted using a symmetric
secret key. This is a common technique.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 14
Requirements for a Cryptographic Hash 
Function
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 15
Relationship Among 
Hash Function 
Properties
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 16
General Structure of Secure Hash Code
 Can use block ciphers as hash functions:
 Using CV0 initial value
 Compute: CVi = E(Yi-1 CVi-1)
 Use final block CVL as the hash value
 Similar to CBC (Cipher Block Chain) but without a key
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 17
Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA)
SHA was originally 
designed by NIST and 
published as a federal 
information processing 
standard in 1993
Was revised in 1995 as 
SHA-1. It produces 
160-bit hash values
In 2002 NIST produced 
a revised version of the 
standard that defined 
three new versions of 
SHA with hash value 
lengths of 256, 384, 
and 512
(Collectively known as 
SHA-2)
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 18
Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA)
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 19
Message Digest Generation Using SHA
512
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 20
SHA-512 Processing 
of a Single 
Block
Ki .. 64-bits additive constants
Wi .. 64-bits words generated 
from 1024-bit messages
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 21
SHA-512 
Processing of 
a Single 
Block
The table of the 80 
additive constants 
Ki for the 80 rounds
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 22
Wi .. 64-bits 80-words generated from 1024-bit messages
SHA-512 
Processing of 
a Single 
Block
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 23
SHA-512 Processing 
of a Single 
Round
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 24
SHA
512 
Logic 
& Algorithm
The SHA-512 algorithm has the property
that every bit of the hash code is a
function of every bit of the input.
The complex repetition of the basic function
F produces results that are well mixed; that
is, it is unlikely that two messages chosen
at random, even if they exhibit similar
regularities, will have the same hash code.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 25
SHA
3 Evolution of Secure Hash
SHA-1 has not yet been "broken”
• No one has demonstrated a technique for 
producing collisions in a practical amount 
of time
• Considered to be insecure and has been 
phased out for SHA-2
NIST announced in 2007 a competition for the 
SHA-3 next generation NIST hash function
• Winning design was announced by NIST in 
October 2012
• SHA-3 is a cryptographic hash function that is 
intended to complement SHA-2 as the 
approved standard for a wide range of 
applications
SHA-2 shares the same structure and 
mathematical operations as its 
predecessors so this is a cause for 
concern
• Because it will take years to find a 
suitable replacement for SHA-2 
should it become vulnerable, NIST 
decided to begin the process of 
developing a new hash standard
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 26
Cybersecurity Fundamentals
Dr. Ehab Abousaif
CCY2001: Introduction to Cybersecurity
PhD in Electrical and Computer Eng., University of Idaho, USA
IEEE member, IMAPS member
College of Computing and Information Technology, AASTMT
Cell:       
01114757888
Email:    ehabkamel@gmail.com
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 4 Cryptography – Part 4 - 27