Topic 6
Network Security Basics
Cybersecurity Fundamentals
Dr. Ehab Abousaif
PhD in Electrical and Computer Eng., University of Idaho, USA
IEEE member, IMAPS member
College of Computing and Information Technology, AASTMT
Cell: 01114757888
Email: ehabkamel@gmail.com
CCY2001: Introduction to Cybersecurity
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 1
Topic 6
Network Security Basics
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 2
Security Facilities in the TCP/IP Protocol Stack
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 3
 One way to provide Web security is to use IP security (IPsec). The advantage of
using IPsec is that it is transparent to end users and applications and provides a
general-purpose solution.
 Furthermore, IPsec includes a filtering capability so that only selected traffic need
incur the overhead of IPsec processing.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 4
Security Facilities in the TCP/IP Protocol Stack
 Another relatively general-purpose solution is to implement security just above TCP. The
example of this approach is the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) and the follow-on Internet
standard known as Transport Layer Security (TLS).
 At this level, there are two implementation choices. For full generality, SSL (or TLS) could
be provided as part of the underlying protocol suite and therefore be transparent to
applications.
 Alternatively, TLS can be embedded in specific packages. For example, virtually all
browsers come equipped with TLS, and most Web servers have implemented the protocol.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 5
Security Facilities in the TCP/IP Protocol Stack
 Application-specific security services are embedded within the particular application.
The advantage of this approach is that the service can be tailored to the specific needs
of a given application.
 S/MIME is an example of the security layer for the mail application protocol (SMTP).
 Kerberos is another example Kerberos is a computer-network authentication protocol
that allows nodes communicating over a non-secure network to prove their identity to
one another in a secure manner. Kerberos provides strong authentication for
client/server applications using secret-key cryptography.
Transport Layer Security
(TLS) is designed to make
use of TCP to provide a
reliable end-to-end secure
service
TLS is not a single protocol
but rather two layers of
protocols
Transport Layer Security
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 6
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 7
TLS Architecture
 The main protocol is the Record Protocol.
 Four higher-layer protocols are defined as
part of TLS: the Handshake Protocol, the
Change Cipher Spec Protocol, the Alert
Protocol, and the Heartbeat Protocol.
These TLS specific protocols are used in
the management of TLS exchanges.
 Http also can operate on top of TLS.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 8
TLS Architecture
The TLS Record Protocol provides two services for
TLS connections:
■■ Confidentiality: The Handshake Protocol defines a
shared secret key that is used for conventional encryption
of TLS payloads.
■■ Message Integrity: The Handshake Protocol also
defines a shared secret key that is used to form a message
authentication code (MAC).
TLS Record
Protocol Operation
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 9
TLS
Architecture
Handshake
Protocol Action
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 10
HTTPS
Hyper Text Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS) is the secure version of HTTP.
HTTPS encrypts all communications between the browser and the website. Web browsers
such as Safari, Firefox, and Chrome also display a padlock icon in the address bar to
visually indicate that a HTTPS connection is in effect.
Data sent using HTTPS provides three important areas of protection:
■■ Encryption: Encrypts the exchanged data to keep it secure from eavesdroppers. The encryption covers the
URL of the requested document, the contents of the document, the contents of browser forms (filled in by
browser user), the cookies sent from browser to server and from server to browser, and the contents of the
HTTP header.
■■ Data integrity: Data cannot be modified or corrupted during transfer, intentionally or otherwise, without
being detected.
■■ Authentication: Proves that your users communicate with the intended website. It protects against man-inthe-middle attacks and builds user trust, which translates into other business benefits.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 11
Secure Shell (SSH)
 Secure Shell (SSH) is a protocol for secure
network communications designed to be
relatively simple and inexpensive to
implement.
 SSH was focused on providing a secure
remote logon facility to replace TELNET
and other remote logon schemes that
provided no security.
 It has become the method of choice for
remote login and X tunneling and is rapidly
becoming one of the most pervasive
applications for encryption technology
outside of embedded systems.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 12
Secure Shell (SSH)
SSH Transport
Layer Protocol
Packet Formation
Wireless LAN Security
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 13
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 14
Wireless Network Threats
■■ Accidental association: Company wireless LANs or wireless access points to wired
LANs in close proximity (e.g., in the same or neighboring buildings) may create
overlapping transmission ranges. A user intending to connect to one LAN may
unintentionally lock on to a wireless access point from a neighboring network. Although
the security breach is accidental, it nevertheless exposes resources of one LAN to the
accidental user.
■■ Malicious association: In this situation, a wireless device is configured to appear to be
a legitimate access point, enabling the operator to steal passwords from legitimate users
and then penetrate a wired network through a legitimate wireless access point.
■■ Ad hoc networks: These are peer-to-peer networks between wireless computers with
no access point between them. Such networks can pose a security threat due to a lack of a
central point of control.
■■ Nontraditional networks: Nontraditional networks and links, such as personal
network Bluetooth devices, barcode readers, and handheld PDAs, pose a security risk in
terms of both eavesdropping and spoofing.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 15
Wireless Network Threats
■■ Identity theft (MAC spoofing): This occurs when an attacker is able to eavesdrop on
network traffic and identify the MAC address of a computer with network privileges.
■■ Man-in-the middle attacks: In a broader sense, this attack involves persuading a user
and an access point to believe that they are talking to each other when in fact the
communication is going through an intermediate attacking device. Wireless networks are
particularly vulnerable to such attacks.
■■ Denial of service (DoS): In the context of a wireless network, a DoS attack occurs
when an attacker continually bombards a wireless access point or some other accessible
wireless port with various protocol messages designed to consume system resources.
■■ Network injection: A network injection attack targets wireless access points that are
exposed to nonfiltered network traffic, such as routing protocol messages or network
management messages. An example of such an attack is one in which bogus
reconfiguration commands are used to affect routers and switches to degrade network
performance.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 16
Mobile Device
Security Elements
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 17
IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN (WLAN)
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 18
IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN (WLAN)
General IEEE 802
MPDU Format
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 19
IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN (WLAN)
IEEE 802.11
Extended
Service Set (ESS)
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 20
IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN (WLAN)
IEEE 802.11 Services
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 21
IEEE 802.11i
WLAN Security
Elements of
IEEE 802.11i
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 22
IEEE 802.11i WLAN Security
IEEE 802.11i
Phases of Operation
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 23
IEEE 802.11i
WLAN Security
IEEE 802.11i Phases of
Operation: Capability Discovery,
Authentication, and Association
IP Security
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 24
IPSec provides security
services at the IP layer by
enabling a system to select
required security protocols
IPSec determines the
algorithm(s) to use for the
service(s), and put in place
any cryptographic keys
required to provide the
requested services
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 25
IP Security
Two protocols are used to provide security:
Authentication Header (AH)
Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)
IPSec provides the following services:
■■ Access control ■■ Connectionless integrity
■■ Data origin authentication ■■ Rejection of replayed packets
■■ Confidentiality (encryption)
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 26
IP Security Modes
Transport Mode
• encrypt & optionally
authenticate IP data
• can do traffic analysis
• good for ESP host to host
traffic
Tunnel Mode
• encrypts entire IP packet
• add new header for next
hop
• no routers on way can
examine inner IP header
• good for VPNs, gateway
to gateway security
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 27
IP Security Modes
Transport Mode
• encrypt & optionally
authenticate IP data
• can do traffic analysis
• good for ESP host to host
traffic
Tunnel Mode
• encrypts entire IP packet
• add new header for next
hop
• no routers on way can
examine inner IP header
• good for VPNs, gateway
to gateway security
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 28
IP Security
End-to-end IPsec
Transport-Mode
Encryption
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 29
IP Security
IPsec TunnelMode Protocol
Operation for ESP
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 30
IP Security
Example of Virtual
Private Network
Implemented with
IPsec Tunnel
Mode
Cybersecurity Fundamentals
Dr. Ehab Abousaif
PhD in Electrical and Computer Eng., University of Idaho, USA
IEEE member, IMAPS member
College of Computing and Information Technology, AASTMT
Cell: 01114757888
Email: ehabkamel@gmail.com
CCY2001: Introduction to Cybersecurity
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 6 Network Security Basics - 31